# DualSTA_SampleTool

DualSTA_SampleTool is a simple network performance measurement program with a
focus on the Windows "DualSTA" Wi-Fi feature.

This feature allows Windows to use simultaneous connections to multiple bands
of a wireless network (5GHz and 2.4GHz for instance). Applications can
query for the secondary interfaces and to bind sockets to those interfaces.
After binding, applications can use the sockets to send data over the secondary
interface.

## Project overview

This project has two main goals:

### Demonstrating how to best use DualSTA feature.

It covers how an application is expected to enable the DualSTA feature and to
send data over a secondary interface.  However, this project does **not** aim
to provide any guidance about how communication should be split between the two
interfaces or reassembled after reception.

### Providing statistics over network performances

The application focus on collecting statistics to evaluate the impact of a
secondary interface on a Wi-Fi connection.

The application will also work without a secondary interface and for other type
of connections, but this is not a focus point.

## Quick Start

The application is a simple echo program that tracks the latency of packets
between a client and a server.

To build the project, you need Visual Studio 2019 version 2.8 or above and to
install Windows SDK version 10.0.21318.0 (or more recent, with the
corresponding project modifications).

To start the server, run
```
DualSTA_SampleTool.exe -listen:*
```

To start the client, with SERVER_IP being the IP address of the server, run
```
DualSTA_SampleTool.exe -target:"SERVER_IP"
```

## Using DualSTA in your application

The DualSTA feature must be enabled using Windows [Wlan
API](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/api/wlanapi/). It is also
recommended to use the [Networking connectivity
API](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/uwp/api/Windows.Networking.Connectivity.NetworkInformation?view=winrt-19041)
to determine when the secondary interface should be used.

### Enabling DualSTA

First thing, your application needs to indicate to the OS it wants to use a
secondary interface. This will let the OS connect the secondary interface if
needed.

1. Open a handle to the WLAN service (`WLANOpenHandle`)

    This handle **must** remain opened for the entire time the application with
    be using the DualSTA feature. The OS will disconnect the secondary
    interface if it detects no client applications are using it.

    üëÅÔ∏è‚Äçüó®Ô∏è See `OpenWlanHandle` in ["adapters.cpp"](adapters.cpp)

2. Get a WLAN interface GUID (`WlanEnumInterfaces`)

    If there are several WLAN interfaces in the system, you can pick any of
    them. DualSTA is enabled globally, for all interfaces. We simply need a
    GUID to call the `WlanSetInterface` API.

    üëÅÔ∏è‚Äçüó®Ô∏è See `GetPrimaryWlanInterfaceGuids` in ["adapters.cpp"](adapters.cpp)

3. Enable secondary STA connections (`WlanSetInterface`)

    Using the opcode `wlan_intf_opcode_secondary_sta_synchronized_connections`
    and the GUID from step 2, a call to `WlanSetInterface` will enable
    secondary STA connections.

    üëÅÔ∏è‚Äçüó®Ô∏è See `RequestSecondaryInterface` in ["adapters.cpp"](adapters.cpp)

This is it! At this point, the WLAN service will bring up a secondary interface
for each Wi-Fi adapter supporting DualSTA (this depends on the driver). If
there is a Wi-Fi connection to a network with several bands, it will start
connecting the secondary interface to the network.

### Querying a secondary interface (and when not to do it)

To send data over the secondary interface, we will need to bind a socket to it.
Without it, the traffic on this socket would go through the same interface as
for any other socket of your application.  However, this also mean the OS
cannot route the packets through the right interface in some situations. For
instance:

- the target address is behind a VPN
- the traffic needs to go through a virtual switch
- there simply is a connected ethernet adapter. It is generally better to
  simply use it

Therefore it is recommended to only use a secondary interface when the
situation is "simple". In more complex cases, it is recommended to keep using a
single interface.

In this context, "simple" means that the primary IP interface is directly
matching a physical WLAN adapter. This ensures the secondary interface traffic
will be routed correctly.  When the IP interface directly matches a physical
WLAN adapter, they share the same GUID.

1. Get the GUID of the primary IP interface (`GetInternetConnectionProfile()`)

    In most scenario, you can get the interface GUID from the preferred
    internet connection profile:

    ```
    NetworkInformation::GetInternetConnectionProfile().NetworkAdapter().NetworkAdapterId();
    ```
    üëÅÔ∏è‚Äçüó®Ô∏è See `GetPrimaryInterfaceGuid` in ["adapters.cpp"](adapters.cpp)

    *Remark*: If your application needs to communicate on local networks, you
    may need more complex solutions such as `GetBestInterfaceEx`.

2. Find a matching WLAN adapter (`WlanEnumInterfaces`)

    Once again, `WlanEnumInterfaces` provide the list of the Wi-Fi interfaces
    in the system. It is then simply a matter of looking if one is matching the
    GUID from step 1.

    üëÅÔ∏è‚Äçüó®Ô∏è See `GetSecondaryInterfaceGuid` in ["adapters.cpp"](adapters.cpp)

3. Query for the secondary interface (`WlanQueryInterface`)

    Using the opcode `wlan_intf_opcode_secondary_sta_interfaces` and the
    primary interface GUID, a call to `WlanQueryInterface` will return the list
    of secondary interfaces related to the primary.

    üëÅÔ∏è‚Äçüó®Ô∏è See `GetSecondaryInterfaceGuid` in ["adapters.cpp"](adapters.cpp)

### Using a secondary interface

We now have identified a secondary interface. Let's see how to use it!

The secondary interface GUID may not be usable right away: there might be a
delay until the corresponding IP interface is ready and can access the network.
This happens for instance when the secondary WLAN adapter is still connecting
to the network.

1. Wait for connectivity (`GetNetworkConnectivityLevel`)

    The Network Connectivity API indicates when an interface is ready through
    the connection profiles. It is recommended to wait until the secondary
    interface is present with a connectivity level different from
    `NetworkConnectivityLevel::None`.

    üëÅÔ∏è‚Äçüó®Ô∏è See `IsAdapterConnected` in ["adapters.cpp"](adapters.cpp)

2. Bind a socket to the secondary interface (`setsockopt`)

    It is necessary to bind a socket to the secondary interface to use it, by
    calling `setsockopt` with the options `IP_UNICAST_IP` or `IPV6_UNICAST_IF`.
    This option requires an interface index. It can be obtained from the
    secondary interface GUID by using `ConvertInterfaceGuidToLuid` and
    `ConvertLuidToIndex` (from the "netioapi.h" header).

    üëÅÔ∏è‚Äçüó®Ô∏è See `SetSocketOutgoingInterface` in ["socket_utils.h"](socket_utils.h)

From this point, the secondary interface is completely set up and the socket
can be used as a normal socket.

### Monitoring network status change notifications

While the application is running, the network conditions could change. For
instance, an ethernet connection could be setup, and the Wi-Fi connection be
disconnected. For non-bounded sockets, the OS automatically redirect the
traffic toward the correct IP interface. But the secondary socket has to be
bound to the secondary interface: it will have to be enabled and disabled
manually depending on the network status.

This can be done by subscribing to the network status change notifications from
`NetworkInformation::NetworkStatusChanged`. It allows to check whether the
primary changes and to tear down or setup a secondary interface when needed.

üëÅÔ∏è‚Äçüó®Ô∏è See `SetupSecondaryInterface` in ["stream_client.cpp"](stream_client.cpp)

## Running DualSTA_SampleTool

DualSTA_SampleTool is a simple echo program that track the latency of packets.
It then displays statistics over the the collected data, allowing to evaluate
the impact of a secondary interface.

The program is composed of a client and a server. The server is simply echoing
back any packet it receives after adding a timestamp.

The client allows to send data at different rates, over one interface or
duplicated over two interfaces.  It will then display a set of statistics (lost
frames, average and median latency, jitter...) for the primary interface, the
secondary interface and the *effective* connection. The effective statistics
use the latency between the time a packet is first sent and when its echo is
first received, ignoring on which interface each event occurs.

It is also possible to collect the raw timestamp in a file for more analysis.

### How to run it

The server and the client must each be run on two computers in the same
network. To test the DualSTA feature, the client must run on a device with a
compatible NIC and driver. It does not matter for the server.

To run the server, simply run the application with the command-line parameter
`-listen:*`.  This will cause the application to begin listening on all
interfaces on the default application port (8888). An IP address may be given
instead of `*` to bind to that specific address. The server will simply echo
back whatever it receives on that port until it is stopped using Ctrl+C.

To run the client, run the application with the command-line parameters
`-target:SERVER_IP -duration:N`, where SERVER_IP is the IP address of the
listening server and N is the number of seconds to run the tool. The client
will then begin streaming data to the server.

### Parameters

#### Additional parameters for both the client and server:

`-?`

Access the help

`-port:<N>`

Changes the port used for communications.

`-loglevel:<N>`

Controls the logs verbosity. Goes from `0` to `4`. `2` is recommended to follow
how the secondary interface is used.

`-prepostrecvs:<N>`

Controls the number of receive operations the application will keep posted on
the Windows IO Completion Port for the socket. See the Windows Threadpool API
documentation that was introduced in Vista for more information, as well as the
WinSock documentation for WSARecv and WSASend.

#### Additional parameters for the client:

`-bitrate:<sd,hd,4k,N>`

The rate at which the application send data. The values correspond to streaming
rates for common video streams (sd is 3 megabits per seconds, hd is 5 and 4k is
25). It is also possible to specify a custom value in megabit per second.

`-framerate:<N>`

How many datagrams are sent during each send operation (effectively grouping
them in a burst). A value too high or too low might cause packet loss rate or
impact the bitrate.

`-secondary:<0,1>`

Whether to use the secondary interface. When set to `0`, a secondary interface
won't be queried, which can be useful for comparison purpose. Note that setting
this parameter to `1` will only cause the application to use a secondary
interface on a best effort basis.

`-output:<path>`

Path to a file where the raw timestamps will be stored in csv format. Each line
will contain the sequence number of a datagram and the timestamp (in
microseconds) at which it was sent by the client, echoed by the server, and
received by the client, both for the primary and secondary interface. -1
indicate the event didn't occurred.

Note the timestamps are collected using QPC, which mean they are relative: each
timestamp should only be compared with timestamp from the same device, there is
no relation between the echo timestamps collected on the server and the send
and received timestamps collected on the client.

## Latency analysis example

TODO